## Introduction {.page_break_before}

A major goal of biomedical research is understanding how changes in biomolecule compositions of cells and tissues lead to disease phenotypes. 
The genome serves as a library of possible transcripts, some of which are instructions for proteins, and proteins act on metabolites. 
The genome thus indirectly determines the set of possible cellular phenotypic states, and the exact cellular state at any given time depends on interaction between the genome with endogenous and exogenous environmental cues. 
To understand how the genome connects to phenotype, measurement of the genome must be accompanied by measurement of downstream layers of the central dogma of biochemistry (Figure 1?). 

Most RNAs encode for proteins, and aside from noncoding RNA and ribozymes, most of the potential functions encoded in a genome are carried out by proteins. 
Although extensive research has nearly commoditized RNA measurment or transcriptomics [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2484], multiple studies have found poor correlation between proteins and their corresponding mRNA [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg3185].
Therefore, functional understanding of a biological state demands quantitations of all proteins that are present. 

Large scale study of the proteins in a biological system is known as proteomics [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/nature19949]. 
Proteomics originally meant large scale studies of protein quantities [@DOI:10.1038/nprot.2017.040], but it has grown to include large scale studies of protein structure[@DOI:10.1038/nprot.2017.100] [@DOI:10.1586/14789450.2015.1079487] [@DOI:10.1074/jbc.REV119.006218], protein-small molecule interactions[@DOI:10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-052120-013205], and protein-protein interactions [@URL:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coisb.2017.04.015].. 
Proteomics is increasingly applied to clinical studies to gain understanding of disease mechansims in humans [@PMID:28436239]. 

Many argue that quantities of proteins are not sufficient to enable understanding and dissection of biological systems. 
The presence of a protein does not necessarily equal the presence of that protein's function. 
Protein functions are regulated in many ways, including allosteric feedback by metabolites and post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation, acylation, or proteolysis [@DOI:10.1002/wsbm.1185]. 
Roughly 2,700 cellular proteins are predicted to be enzymes [@DOI:10.1186/gb-2004-6-1-r2], many of which act on metabolites that are intermediates required for cell proliferation or energy production.

The large scale measurement of the cellular metabolite pools is known as metabolomics [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1039/C9RA08985C], which is sometimes further separated into polar metabolomics and lipidomics [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-018-1252-y]. 
Due to the chemical heterogeneity of metabolites, metabolomics studies use a variety of different separation and mass spectrometry (MS) techniques, including both gas chromatography (GC) [@PMID:27038389] and liquid chromatograhpy (LC)[@DOI:10.1002/jssc.201100532]. 
The field of metabolomics is trending toward more use of LC-MS over NMR [@DOI:10.1016/j.trac.2018.11.021].

Measurement of multiple omic layers is know as multiomics. 
MS measures peptides (or intact proteins [@DOI:10.1039/C9MO00154A]) for proteomic analysis, but MS also measures metabolites for metabolomic analysis. 
Increasingly studies use MS to measure both proteomes and metabolomes from the same sample. 
Although multiomics can refer to measuring at least any two omes, throughout this review we focus on multiomic measurements between proteomes and metabolomes. 

Integrating data from multiomics should provide more information about the cellular state than the sum of each dataset. 
Multiomic data integration methods have been developed with different classes of goals. 
More work is needed to develop methods that take advantage of multiomic data to discover new biological insights into how systems work. 

Previous reviews have covered related topics. 
A recent review surveyed multiomic studies in mitochondria [@url:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165993619303668] with a focus on sample preparation, qualitity control, methods to collect MS data, and linking measured molecules to phenotypes of respirometry. 
Another review gives an overview of each omic method, considerations before performing a multiomic method, and multiomic integration [@url:https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-017-1215-1].
Misra *et al.* reviewed multiomics with a focus on multiomic integration tools [@doi:https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055].  
A metabolomics-centered review was recently published that discusses multiomic integration [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2020.10.038].

In this review we focus on the following topics with a focus on MS-based multiomics studies that combine proteomics and metabolomics:

* sample prepartion methods
* data collection methods
* data integration
* applications to model organisms
* applications to clinical studies


List of Planned Figures:

1. overview of how omic layers are related showing different 'flavors' of each omic analysis

  genomics: transcription factor binding (chip-seq), long range structure (ATAC seq?), etc
  transcriptomics: microarrays, RNA-seq, long read nanopore or pacbio
  proteomics: interactomics, structural proteomics (thermal proteome profiling or CETSA), PTMomics
  metabolomics: polar metabolomics, lipidomics, 

2.  Workflow for typical MS-based multi-omics. 
  from sample preparation, extraction to data collection, data intergration and processing.

3. Table of clinical multiomics studies
4. Figure showing concepts in multiomics integration?
5. 

