## Clinical applications of multi-omics (proteomics, metabolomics, and/or lipidomics)

Literature currently focused on proteogenomics (integration of genome, transcriptome, and proteome)"Clinical multi-omics strategies for the effective cancer management"[@url:https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2018.00678]

Holistic approach has the ability to improve prognostics and predictive accuracy of disease phenotypes to aid in better treatment and prevention
"Multi-omics Data Integration, Interpretation, and Its Application"[@url:https://doi.org/10.1177/1177932219899051]

## Approaches in cancer research:
* "Integration of Proteomics and Metabolomics Revealed Metabolite–Protein Networks in ACTH-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma" [@url:https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2018.00678]: gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) for metabolomics, plus nano liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry(nanoLC-MS/MS) proteomics. Using metabolomic and proteomic data to identify signaling pathways important in metabolic regulation of tumorigenesis. Reveal biomarkers for disease diagnosis, monitoring and therapeutic targets. Looking for changes in tumor on the pituitary gland (adrenocorticotropic hormone-secreting pituitary adenomas (ACTH-PA)). Downregulated glycolysis and fatty acid synthesis. Myc signaling pathway significantly participated in the metabolic changes and tumorigenesis of ACTH-PA. 
* "L-Arginine Modulates T Cell Metabolism and Enhances Survival and Anti-tumor Activity"  [@doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.031]: investigation of proteomic and metabolic adaptations underlying CD4+ T cell activation using MS. Proteins were analyzed by liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry (LC-MS). In parallel, polar metabolites were analyzed by non-targeted flow-injection metabolomics (semi-quantitative method that allows rapid and deep profiling of metabolites. limitations: isobaric compounds cannot be discriminated + possible in-source degradation). Findings: increased L-arginine levels has effects on T cell activation, differentiation, and function.
* "Concurrent lipidomics and proteomics on malignant plasma cells from multiple myeloma patients: Probing the lipid metabolome" [@url:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0227455] comparing targeted and untargeted lipidomics and proteomics between relapsed and newly diagnosed MM patients
* "Proteometabolomics of bladder cancer: Current and future prospects" [@doi:10.3233/CBM-150479]: simultaneous proteome and metabolome data from urine and blood for urinary bladder cancer patient surveillance to aid in early detection of bladder cancer 
* "Grade-Dependent Metabolic Reprogramming in Kidney Cancer Revealed by Combined Proteomics and Metabolomics Analysis"   [@doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1703]

## Approaches in COVID-19 research:
* "Proteomic and Metabolomic Characterization of COVID-19 Patient Sera" [@url:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.032]: proteomic and metabolomic profiling of serum from 46 COVID-19 patients. Stable isotope labeled proteomics TMTpro (16plex) and and ultra performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) untargeted metabolomics to analyze samples. Dysregulation of macrophage, platelet degranulation, complement system, and metabolic suppression in severe COVID-19 patients, useful for selection of biomarkers for severity evaluation. Implemented machine learning model using expression levels of 22 serum proteins and 7 metabolites with overall accuracy of 93.5% in the training set.
*Large-Scale Multi-omic Analysis of COVID-19 Severity: [@url:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2020.10.003]: investigation of proteins, lipids, and metabolites associated with COVID-19 status and severity in pts admitted with moderate to severe respiratory issues presumably related to SARS-CoV-2 infection.
* "Metabolomic/lipidomic profiling of COVID-19 and individual response to tocilizumab" [@url:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1009243]
* "Multi-Omics Resolves a Sharp Disease-State Shift between Mild and Moderate COVID-19" [@url:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.037]
* "Multi-Omics integration analysis of respiratory specimen characterizes baseline molecular determinants associated with COVID-19 diagnosis" [@url:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147082]
* "Longitudinal multi-omics analysis identifies responses of megakaryocytes, erythroid cells and plasmablasts as hallmarks of severe COVID-19 trajectories" [@url:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.20187369]

## Misc disease states:
* "Integration of metabolomics and proteomics in multiple sclerosis: From biomarkers discovery to personalized medicine" [@url:https://doi.org/10.1002/prca.201500083]: majority of biomarkers for MS are not sensitive and/or specific enough to be used for population screening. From the 188 proposed biomarker candidates for MS found in CSF, only 10 (5%) have been successfully verified, while 20 have been falsified. This is likely due to the inter-individual variation. Integrating omics approaches may help with this pitfall; proteomics in combination with the other “omics” may synergize to proide a more precise spectrum of information capable of better characterizing a phenotype. When proteins alone, metabolites alone and proteins and metabolites together were uploaded into the ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) tool,  number of matched molecules for “proteins and metabolites” is higher than the sum of molecules matched in the separate searches.
* "High-throughput mediation analysis of human proteome and metabolome identifies mediators of post-bariatric surgical diabetes control"[@url:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27289-2] patients with type 2 diabetes  randomized to RYGB vs nonsurgical diabetes/weight management; fasting plasma proteome and metabolome were assayed up to 3 years. Plasma proteome profiling was performed using the high-throughput DNA aptamer-based SOMAscan assay platform. Plasma metabolomics were profiled using a commercial semi-quantitative mass spectrometry-based platform (Metabolon, Inc.)  using UPLC-MS/MS. Main mediator of improved glycemic control was GHR, which was reduced 3 months after RYGB. GH signaling = diabetogenic effects.





